# PUNCH_IDL_Tools
Tools for accessing PUNCH data in [IDL](https://www.nv5geospatialsoftware.com/docs/using_idl_home.html) and/or [GDL](https://github.com/gnudatalanguage/gdl).

These tools require the `gen` and `astrom` packages from
[SolarSoft](https://www.lmsal.com/solarsoft/), and optionally the
`vso/ontology` package.

The intent is that they will allow SolarSoft users to ingest and
interpret any level of PUNCH data from Level 0 to 3. 

They should work equally well in recent versions of IDL and the current
GIT of GDL.

## Status

These routines have as yet had limited testing. In particular, as yet
no images with non-null distortion tables have been available for
testing.

All testing by the Author has been on Linux systems
([OpenSuSE](https://www.opensuse.org/) with IDL 
and [Manjaro](https://manjaro.org/) with GDL)

**Note**: using distortion tables on low-level data requires the latest
version of `wcs_get_pixel`, please ensure that your SolarSoft
installation has been updated since 29-Oct-2025.

## Tools provided

### READ_PUNCH:

Reads a PUNCH FITS file into IDL. This should handle the
Rice-compressed files either with the shared library in the appropriate
subdirectory of `/soft/rsi/ssw/vobs/ontology/binaries/` and
`fitsio_read_image` or via the [`imcopy`](####imcopy) command, and the
regular `readfits` procedure.

In general, it is probably better to use the shared library by adding
the `/use_shared_lib` keyword. However the use of DLL's is not (yet)
supported by GDL so `imcopy` must be used in that case. This is
configured as the default behaviour.

**N.B.** The layout of a Rice-compressed file is assumed to be:

* A dummy header for the primary data block.
* The actual primary data compressed into a BINTABLE in the first
extension.
* Uncertainty information in the second extension.
* Distortion lookup tables in later extensions (`fits_info` is used to
  identify them).


### PUNCH_STACK

Reads the data from a list of PUNCH FITS files into a data cube. Also
returns supporting data (uncertainties and distortions) as available.
 
Reads the data using `read_punch.pro` from a list of PUNCH FITS files into 
data cubes of total brightness and polarized brightness. Also returns 
supporting data (uncertainties and distortions) as available.

### WCS_APPEND_TABLES

Append the distortion tables to the WCS structure generated by
`fitshead2wcs` so that they can be used by `wcs_get_coord` and
`wcs_get_pixel`.

Notes:
* When the shared libraries are used, including the `filename = ...`
  keyword should also work.
* Relies on PUNCH NOT using dq or ds tables.

This is the preferred method rather than using the hacked versions of
`wcs_get_...` or `xy2ad` and `ad2xy`.

### PUNCH_XY2AD and PUNCH_AD2XY (Deprecated)

In the current SolarSoft astrometry package, the only way to access
distortion tables is by opening the file with `fits_open`, but this is
not possible for Rice-compressed files. These routines therefore
combine the relevant parts of `fits_xy2ad` and `xy2ad`, and
`fits_ad2xy` and `ad2xy` respectively. 


Using the WCS suite is preferred.

### PUNCH_WCS_GET_COORD and PUNCH_WCS_GET_PIXEL (Deprecated)

These routines support the conversion of WCS structure from data
coordinates to IDL pixel position and back. These allow the use of
distortion tables alongside the WCS family of SSWIDL astrometry codes.
- punch_wcs_get_coord: This procedure takes a WCS structure, and calculates the 
                            data coordinates at each IDL pixel position.
- punch_wcs_get_pixel: This procedure is inverse of punch_wcs_get_coord
                            and takes a WCS structure, and converts
                            coordinates back into IDL pixel positions.


It is now recommended to use the `filename` keyword in `fitshead2wcs`
or `wcs_append_tables` to properly integrate the distortion into the system.

### REPAIR_PUNCH_HEAD

Only applicable to low-level (L0, L1) files. 

There are a number of flaws in the headers of some version 0x files
that need to be corrected if the distortion tables are to be used on
the RA and Dec coordinates. Other more esoteric fixes are available for
development purposes.

Should be applied before using `fitshead2wcs`.

### FIX_Z_HEAD

Modifies header keys starting with "Z", in Rice-compressed files read
by `fitsio_read_image` to be the actual image parameters
(e.g. `ZNAXIS1` becomes `NAXIS1`), tries to follow the pattern of
`imcopy`. This is only intended to be used internally within
`read_punch`.

## Using latest SSW package
We recommend using the latest SSW package to run these routines smoothly
across various platforms (Windows, Linux, MacOS etc.).

## Getting help

All routines contain a documentation header that can be read via
`doc_library`.

For further assistance, please open an issue or create a discussion
here on GitHub.

## Contributing
We welcome all contributions. Please open a pull request to contribute.

#### imcopy

imcopy is an ancillary program that is part of the cfitsio
library. However many Linux distributions do not build it by
default. It can be simply built by downloading the [cfitsio
source](https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/fitsio/) and going to the
`utilities` subdirectory and compiling with (assuming the cfitsio
library is installed):

    gcc -o imcopy imcopy.c $(pkg-config -libs -cflags cfitsio$)

and copying the executable to somewhere in your path
(e.g. `/usr/local/bin` or `~/bin` if you don't have root access).

Note that as of 3-Nov-25, the version of `imcopy` distributed with
SolarSoft does not correctly handle all PUNCH files.

For Linux users also check whether your distro installs it under a
modified name, (_e.g._ Arch derivatives install it as `cfitsio-imcopy`
--- this is automatically searched). If you find other modified names
let me know and I'll add them to the search.

